post: building a unified design system (#85)
cloudx-labs/posts: posts/maxistahl/03.design-system-post-1.md

---
title: Building a Unified Design System Language
published: true
description: Uniting UI-UX and Dev Teams through shared terminology and optimal workflows in Design System development
tags: 'design, react, webdev, javascript'
cover_image: ./assets/design-system-post-1/cover.png
id: 1499474
series: 'Design Systems: The Next Chapter'
---

> The frontend job can be defined as creating a visual interface using code. However, this definition is basic and doesn't capture the full complexity of modern frontend development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frontend job can be defined as creating a visual interface using code. However, this definition is basic and doesn't capture the full complexity of modern frontend development.
```

I would use `whole` instead of `full`, but neither of them are wrong

In the past, there was a conflict between developers and designers due to the lack of rules in UI design. The explosion of creativity from designers and the adoption of new techniques by developers led to both sides improving their skills and establishing clear guidelines for designing and coding interfaces. Fortunately, this conflict has been resolved, and now developers and designers work together.

From the introduction, we can infer a few implicit concepts:

Effective communication and a common language are necessary between both areas.

* Both developers and designers share the same goal.
* This shared goal serves a bigger purpose.

> * This point in frontend history can be compared to Henry Ford's factory revolution, as a new paradigm called the Modern Design System emerged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This point in frontend history can be compared to Henry Ford's factory revolution, as a new paradigm known as the Modern Design System emerged.
```

Creating and maintaining a modern design system is no longer solely the designer's responsibility. Developers also play a crucial role in integrating the design system into the code by identifying implementation challenges and maximizing its benefits.

> This new scenario presents opportunities and challenges. The first challenge is effective communication between developers and designers. The second challenge is establishing a common language or understanding between the two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new scenario presents opportunities and challenges. The first one is reaching an effective communication between developers and designers. The second challenge is establishing a common language or understanding between the two of them.
```
`both` works better, but I get it if you're avoiding repetition

## Atoms, Design Tokens, Components, States, Variants... and more is comming.

> Effective communication requires that both parties (Emitter and Receiver, and vice versa) have a common language. At this point, it is crucial to understand the meaning and importance of each term involved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Effective communication requires that both parties (Emitter and Receiver, and vice versa) share a common language. At this point, it's crucial to understand the meaning and importance of each term involved.
```

### Atom

![Atom](assets/design-system-post-1/atom.png)

> An Atom represents the indivisible parts of a UI. In terms of HTML tags, examples of Atoms include buttons, input fields, and span tags. An Atom can consist of one or more tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Atom represents each indivisible part of a UI. In terms of HTML tags, examples of Atoms include buttons, input fields, and span tags. An Atom can consist of one or more tokens.
```

### Design Token

![Design Token](assets/design-system-post-1/design-token.png)

> A Token, encompasses all the values that make up an Atom. Tokens include properties like padding, margin, border, shadow, color, animations, etc. Tokens play a key role in Design Systems (DS) by ensuring consistency in values across the entire system. We can delve deeper into Tokens in a future post, so stay tuned!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Token encompasses all the values that make up an Atom. Tokens include properties like padding, margin, border, shadow, color, animations, etc.
These elements also play a key role in Design Systems (DS) by ensuring consistency in values across the entire system. We may delve deeper into Tokens in a future post, so stay tuned!
```

### Components

![Component](assets/design-system-post-1/component.png)

A Component often refers to a group of Atoms working together as a single unit, but with increased complexity. These components, also known as "Molecules," can exhibit the same behavior as an Atom or take advantage of multiple types of Atoms to create new shapes and behavior. In a regular DS, it is an unbreakable rule that Components should never have business rules. If a component requires business rules, it should not be part of the DS but can be considered an internal component within a system. We will discuss this further in a future post.

### States

![State](assets/design-system-post-1/state.png)

States can be a bit tricky to understand. A State represents a value that determines the appearance or behavior of a component or atom. For example, a progress bar that displays a confirmation icon when the state changes represents the same component with a different state.

### Variants

![Variant](assets/design-system-post-1/variant.png)

> A Variant is similar to Alligator Loki from Loki (Marvel fan alert!), but if you're not familiar with the reference, Variants in a DS refer to Buttons (Atoms or even Components) with different colors or shapes within the same DS. Despite the variations, they all remain Buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Variant is similar to Alligator Loki from Loki (Marvel fan alert!), but if you're not familiar with this reference, Variants in a DS refer to Buttons (Atoms or even Components) with different colors or shapes within the same DS. Despite the variations, they all remain Buttons.
```

---
title: Building a Unified Design System Language
published: true
description: Uniting UI-UX and Dev Teams through shared terminology and optimal workflows in Design System development
tags: 'design, react, webdev, javascript'
cover_image: ./assets/design-system-post-1/cover.png
id: 1499474
series: 'Design Systems: The Next Chapter'
---

> Frontend job can be defined as creating a visual interface using code. However, this definition is basic and doesn't capture the full complexity of modern frontend development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Frontend development can be defined as creating a visual interface using code. However, this definition is basic and doesn't capture the full complexity of modern frontend development.
```

From the introduction, we can infer a few implicit concepts:

Effective communication and a common language are necessary between both areas.

* Both developers and designers share the same goal.
* This shared goal serves a bigger purpose.
* This point in frontend history can be compared to Henry Ford's factory revolution, as a new paradigm known as the Modern Design System emerged.

Creating and maintaining a modern design system is no longer solely the designer's responsibility. Developers also play a crucial role in integrating the design system into the code by identifying implementation challenges and maximizing its benefits.

This new scenario presents opportunities and challenges. The first one is reaching an effective communication between developers and designers. The second challenge is establishing a common language or understanding between the two of them.

## Atoms, Design Tokens, Components, States, Variants... and more is comming.

Effective communication requires that both parties (Emitter and Receiver, and vice versa) share a common language. At this point, it's crucial to understand the meaning and importance of each term involved.

### Atom

> ![Atom](assets/design-system-post-1/atom.png)

Reviewer 3: The a11y text should explain the image
```suggestion
![An atom represented using a Venn diagram](assets/design-system-post-1/atom.png)
```

An Atom represents each indivisible part of a UI. In terms of HTML tags, examples of Atoms include buttons, input fields, and span tags. An Atom can consist of one or more tokens.

### Design Token

![Design Token](assets/design-system-post-1/design-token.png)

A Token encompasses all the values that make up an Atom. Tokens include properties like padding, margin, border, shadow, color, animations, etc.
These elements also play a key role in Design Systems (DS) by ensuring consistency in values across the entire system. We may delve deeper into Tokens in a future post, so stay tuned!

### Components

![Component](assets/design-system-post-1/component.png)

> A Component often refers to a group of Atoms working together as a single unit, but with an increased complexity. These components, also known as "Molecules," can exhibit the same behavior as an Atom or take advantage of multiple types of Atoms to create new shapes and behavior. In a regular DS, it is an unbreakable rule that Components should never have business rules. If a component requires business rules, it should not be part of the DS but can be considered an internal component within a system. We will discuss this further in a future post.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Component often refers to a group of Atoms working together as a single unit, but with an increased complexity. These components, also known as "Molecules", can exhibit the same behavior as an Atom or take advantage of multiple types of Atoms to create new shapes and behavior. In a regular DS, it is an unbreakable rule that Components should never have business rules. If a component requires business rules, it should not be part of the DS but can be considered an internal component within a system. We will discuss this further in a future post.
```
